6453
In this year
the retinue said to Igor,
"Sveinald's retainers are clothed with swords and garments,
but we are naked.
Go, prince, with us after tribute, that you obtain (it) as we."
Igor heeded them:
he went to Dereva after tribute,
and he added to the first tribute.
He and his men oppressed them.
Having seized the tribute, he returned to his city.
Having come back (and) having changed his mind, he said to his retinue,
"Go home with the tribute.
But I will turn back
(and) will walk back yet again."
He sent his retinue home and with a small (part) of his retinue he returned,
desiring more possessions.
But the Derevlians heard that he (was) coming back, (and) sought counsel with their prince Mal,
"If a wolf introduces itself among the sheep, then it will make away with the whole flock,

if they do not kill it. So also (with) this: if we do not kill him, he will destroy us all."
They sent to him, saying,
"For what do you return?
You have taken all the tribute."
But Igor did not heed them.
And having set forth from the city Iskorosten, the Derevlians killed Igor and his retinue,
for there were (just) a few of them.
And Igor was buried.
His grave is near the city Iskorosten in Dereva even to this day.
But Olga was in Kiev with her son, the child Svjatoslav,
as well as his tutor Asmund.
His commander was Sveinald,
father of Mistisha.
And the Derevlians said,
"Lo! We have killed the Russian prince.
(Let us) take his wife Olga for our prince Mal, as well as Svjatoslav, and we will do with him as we wish."
And the Derevlians sent their best men, 20 by number, in a boat to Olga.
And they arrived below the Borichev in the boat. For at that time there was water flowing at the foot of the Kievan hill and the people had not settled at the base, but rather on the hill.
And there was a city, Kiev, where the court of Gordjata and Nicephorus now is.
But the prince's court was in the city, where the court of the domesticus is behind the Holy Mother of God above the hill.
(It is) the tower court, for there was a tower of stones.
