How much further, Catilina, will you carry your abuse of our forbearance ?
How much longer will your reckless temper baffle our restraint ?
What bounds will you set to this display of your uncontrolled audacity ?
Have you not been impressed by the nightly guards upon the Palatine, by the watching of the city by sentinels ?
Are you not affected by the alarm of the people, by the rallying of all loyal citizens, by the convening of the senate in this safely-guarded spot, by the looks and the expressions of all assembled here ?
Do you not perceive that your designs are exposed ? Do you not see that your conspiracy is even now fully known and detected by all who are here assembled? What you did last night and the night before, where you were and whom you summoned, and what plans you laid, do you suppose that there is one of us here who does not know ?
Alas what degenerate days are these !
The senate is well aware of the facts, the consul can perceive them all;
but the criminal still lives.
Lives?
Yes, lives; and even comes down to the senate, takes part in the public deliberations, and marks down with ominous glances every single one of us for massacre.
And we, such is our bravery, think we are doing our duty to our country, if we merely keep ourselves out of the way of his reckless words and bloody deeds.
No, Catilina, long ere now you should yourself have been led by the consul's orders to execution ; and on your own head should have been brought down the destruction which you are now devising for us.
The most eminent P. Scipio, the pontifex maximus, was not actually a magistrate when he executed Ti. Gracchus for attempting some not very revolutionary changes in the constitution of the state ;
and are we, the consuls now in office, to bear with Catilina, when he is thirsting to waste the whole earth with fire and sword ?
I do not refer to cases too remote in date, such as the execution by C. Servilius Ahala's own hand of Spurius Spurius Maelius when he was aiming at a revolution.
But it was once, it was once deemed a virtue in this state for brave men to inflict more signal punishments on a destructive citizen than on the most hostile foreign enemy.
We are already armed with a resolution of the senate against you, Catilina, in terms both forcible and weighty ; we are not without the guidance of public deliberation and the decision of this noble order :
we, we alone, I say it openly, we consuls are found wanting.

The senate once voted that the consul L. Opimius should provide for the protection of the state against harm :
and before a single night had intervened, C. Gracchus, whose father, grandfather, and ancestors were all distinguished men, was executed on suspicion of certain treasonable aims ;
with him were put to death M. Fulvius, an ex-consul, and his two sons.
A similar resolution of the senate committed the protection of the state to the consuls C. Marius and L. Valerius :
and did L. Saturninus, tribune of the plebs, and C. Servilius, praetor, have to wait a single day after that vote, before they received the punishment prescribed by the state ?
Yet here are we waiting twenty days and allowing the senate's resolution to lose its edge.
Yes, we have a formal resolution of the senate to this effect ; but it remains an unpublished document, a sword still in the sheath, though it is a resolution, Catilina, which rightly understood required your immediate execution.
Yet you live; and live not to abandon but to add strength to your effrontery.
I desire, conscript fathers, to be merciful ; I desire at a moment so critical to the state not to appear careless ; but I am even now convicting myself of conduct which is both remiss and wicked.
Even in Italy a base of operations against the Roman people has been established among the hill-passes of Etruria ; the number of our foes is increasing day by day ; but the general who controls those operations and the leader who directs those foes we see within the walls of Rome, ay and even in the senate, plotting every day some fresh device for bringing internal ruin upon our state.
If then at last, Catilina, I order your arrest or your execution, I shall presumably have more reason to fear that all loyal citizens will declare my action too tardy than that a single person will pronounce it too harsh.
But this particular step, which ought to have been taken long ago, I have certain reasons for not being induced to take at present.
You will perish in the end ; but not till it is certain there will be no one in Rome so shameless, so desperate, so exactly the counterpart of yourself, as not to admit the justice of your execution.
Just so long as there is a single man who dares to defend you, you will live : but you will live as you live now, held at bay by the staunch defenders whom I have stationed everywhere to prevent any possibility of your assailing the state.
Many eyes and many ears, moreover, though you perceive them not, will be vigilant, as they have been vigilant heretofore, and will keep watch over all your actions.
And as a matter of fact, Catilina, for what are you waiting now, if the shades of night can no longer veil your abominable conferences, and if the walls of your private house can no longer contain the phrases used by your fellow-conspirators ?
What if everything is being exposed to the light and breaking out of concealment ?
Abandon your design even now ; take my warning ; forget your thoughts of fire and sword.
You are hemmed in on all sides ;
clearer than daylight to us are all your plans
