When, O Catiline, do you mean to cease abusing our patience?
How long is that madness of yours still to mock us?
When is there to be an end of that unbridled audacity of yours, swaggering about as it does now?
Do not the nightly guards placed on the Palatine Hill—do not the watches posted throughout the city—does not the alarm of the people, and the union of all good men—does not the precaution taken of assembling the senate in this most defensible place—do not the looks and countenances of this venerable body here present, have any effect upon you?
Do you not feel that your plans are detected? Do you not see that your conspiracy is already arrested and rendered powerless by the knowledge which every one here possesses of it?
What is there that you did last night, what the night before—where were you—who was there that you summoned to meet you—what design was there which was adopted by you, with which you think that any one of us is unacquainted?
Shame on the age and on its principles!
The senate is aware of these things; the consul sees them; 
and yet this man lives.
Lives! 
aye, he comes even into the senate. He takes a part in the public deliberations; he is watching and marking down and checking off for slaughter every individual among us.
And we, gallant men that we are, think that we are doing our duty to the republic if we keep out of the way of his frenzied attacks.
You ought, O Catiline, long ago to have been led to execution by command of the consul. That destruction which you have been long plotting against us ought to have already fallen on your own head.
What? Did not that most illustrious man, Publius Scipio, the Pontifex Maximus, in his capacity of a private citizen, put to death Tiberius Gracchus, though but slightly undermining the constitution?
And shall we, who are the consuls, tolerate Catiline, openly desirous to destroy the whole world with fire and slaughter?
For I pass over older instances, such as how Caius Servilius Ahala with his own hand slew Spurius Maelius when plotting a revolution in the state.
There was once such virtue in this republic that brave men would repress mischievous citizens with severer chastisement than the most bitter enemy.
For we have a resolution of the senate, a formidable and authoritative decree against you, O Catiline; the wisdom of the republic is not at fault, nor the dignity of this senatorial body.
We, we alone—I say it openly—we, the consuls, are failing in our duty.

The senate once passed a decree that Lucius Opimius, the consul, should take care that the republic suffered no injury.
Not one night elapsed.
There was put to death, on some mere suspicion of disaffection, Caius Gracchus, a man whose family had borne the most unblemished reputation for many generations. There was slain Marcus Fulvius, a man of consular rank, and all his children.
By a like decree of the senate the safety of the republic was entrusted to Caius Marius and Lucius Valerius, the consuls.
Did not the vengeance of the republic overtake Lucius Saturninus, a tribune of the people, and Caius Servilius, the praetor, without the delay of one single day?
But we for these twenty days have been allowing the edge of the senate's authority to grow blunt.
For we are in possession of a similar decree of the senate, but we keep it locked up in its parchment—buried, I may say, in the sheath; and according to this decree you ought, O Catiline, to be put to death this instant.
You live—and you live not to lay aside but to persist in your audacity.
I wish, O conscript fathers, to be merciful; I wish not to appear negligent amid such danger to the state; but I do now accuse myself of remissness and culpable inactivity.
A camp is pitched in the entrance of Etruria in hostility to the republic; the number of the enemy increases every day.
And yet the general of that camp, the leader of those enemies, we see within the walls—yes, and even in the senate—planning every day some internal injury to the republic.
If, O Catiline, I should now order you to be arrested and put to death, I should have to fear lest all good men should say that I had acted too late rather than that anyone should think I had acted cruelly.
But yet this, which ought to have been done long since, I have good reason for not doing as yet.
You will be put to death when there shall be not one person so wicked or abandoned as not to admit that it has been rightly done.
As long as one person exists who dares to defend you, you shall live—but you shall live as you do now, surrounded by my many and trusty guards so that you cannot stir against the republic.
Many eyes and ears will watch and guard you, as they have done up to now, though you do not perceive them.
For what is there, Catiline, that you can still expect, if night cannot conceal your wicked meetings in darkness and private houses cannot hide the voice of your conspiracy? If everything is seen and revealed?
Change your purpose; trust me; forget the slaughter and the fires you are planning.
You are hemmed in on all sides; 
all your plans are clearer than daylight to us.

